Coming here is a great pleasure and great honor! This is my first time in Scandinavia.
I've travelled to 44 countries so far, but [this is] the first visit to Scandinavia. Certainly hoping it won't be my last.
But it's also been a bit challenging for me to think about what exactly I would talk about in the context of...
.. this conference. Now, the conference is "Oslo Blockchain Day." Those of you who know me probably...
.. know that I'm interested in the open public blockchains: the ones that are disruptive, the ones...
... that are global, free, and censorship-resistant. Things like Bitcoin, like Ethereum. I'm interested in those...
.. because they provide remedies for some big societal problems. Problems such as corrupt governance.
Problems such as failing democratic institutions. Problems such as large populations of unbanked people,
corrupt banks and banking practices. Difficulties in finance and international finance.
Problems - in short - that Norway doesn't have. [laughter] So that's a bit of a challenge. If I go to Argentina and...
I say, "You know... it's probably not a good idea to have your government in charge of money," they say:
"Well... obviously!" Obviously. Thirty-five years ago, they were throwing people out of aircraft for disagreeing...
.. with them. Not exactly the kind of government you want to give power over the banking system.
Currency controls, hyperinflation... you can't have that conversation with a Norwegian.
If I go to a Norwegian and say, "I really don't think government should be in charge of money,"
the average Norwegian would say, "Why not? They're doing a very good job."
"I'm very pleased with my government."
It's true, right? This is a bit of a challenge, to explain why these technologies matter in one of the few places...
.. in the world where government mostly works in a very good way. It's not tyrannical, it's not oppressive.
Quite the opposite, quite the opposite... In fact two days ago, I was walking around the city & I noticed a whole...
.. lot of people wearing turbans. Many of them didn't look like Sikhs, but they were wearing turbans anyway.
I asked, "What is this?" "Oh, it's Turban Day today!" On Turban Day, in order to show solidarity with immigrant...
.. populations, especially Sikhs, we all wear colorful turbans and we have a competition for who has...
.. the best turban, which then gets displayed. Like... oh my god!
In the United States, we're building a wall to keep out the wave of refugees who are coming from countries...
.. that we recently bombed. Kind of the same thing? [laughter]
It's a bit of a strange situation, trying to explain why you would need such a thing. Norwegians have very...
.. effective banking. Efficient, convenient. This is one of the most cashless societies in the world.
Actually, it's the second most cashless country in the world. Do you know who the first cashless country...
.. in the world is? Anyone? [AUDIENCE]: Sweden? [ANDREAS]: Kenya. Whoa, you didn't expect that one!
Kenya. Because of M-Pesa, a system of digital money that's transmitted using SMS. But Norway is #2.
Almost there. You can catch up soon. This is a country in which cash is almost invisible.
I haven't used cash at all since I've been here. Credit cards, debit cards, very convenient. You also have...
.. mobile payment systems. You can use this system called Vipps, I believe? Very easily you can send money...
.. to anyone, up to about five thousand kroner. You can send more to some organisations. You have to pay...
.. a fee if you want that. But under five thousand is basically free and fast, instantaneous almost.
Do you use checks in this country? When is the last time you saw a check? Let's see who's over fifty [years old].
[Has] anybody seen a check here? No? You've seen checks? Very good. Could you explain a check to...
.. a fifteen-year old Norwegian? They'd think you're an alien, right? It would be a bit like trying to explain...
.. a fax machine. This is the challenge: explaining this technology. Well, the rest of the world isn't like Norway.
It simply isn't. In hundreds of countries, more than a hundred, government is not benevolent, functioning,
and incorrupt. Banks are rapacious predators, not partners in business. Control of money by institutions...
.. leads to power concentration and corruption. But I'm not going to try and sell you these technologies on that...
.. basis. I'm not trying to sell these technologies. What I'm trying to understand is, what is the perspective...
.. from which a country like Norway can benefit from a technology such as Bitcoin or Ethereum.
What is a blockchain's purpose in this country? The real idea here is an issue of functionality to me.
If you look at what you can do with Vipps, for example, and you look at what you can do with Bitcoin, it seems...
.. like Bitcoin is just a weird, geeky version of Vipps that's difficult to explain - but other than that doesn't seem to...
.. have any benefit. The fees are higher on Bitcoin too. How many of you here have done at least one transaction...
.. using an open cryptocurrency? Bitcoin, Ethereum, or anything else? Pretty much everyone? At least 80%.
So why would you use this technology here? I'd like to take a moment to think back about the early days...
.. of the internet, and give you a comparison of a time which may give you some insight. In the 1990s,
I was trying to introduce a new technology to financial services companies in London. At the time,
I came with this new technology as a young consultant and I told them, "This is called the internet."
"We have a system called 'electronic mail.' You can use it to communicate with other financial services...
.. companies." It was very difficult, because they said, "But we already have faxes, we already have telexes."
If you make the comparison, email at the time wasn't working so well. [With] fax, you could send text,
but you could also send a drawing, you could send a diagram, you could send a chart. You could hand-write...
.. a note and fax it. You couldn't do any of those things with email. Attachments were not working very well,
capacity wasn't there. If you tried to attach an image, we didn't have scanners and cameras, things like that...
.. [which] made it easy. You couldn't really do that. Email didn't have guaranteed delivery for text.
But every single institution that I had working with me had telex, and telex had guaranteed delivery with proof...
.. that you could take to a court, so they used it for the settlement of securities instruments, because they...
.. could prove that a telex had been received. So how do you tell people this [internet] is going to be better,
when at the time it's not better? If you looked at the internet then, what you see is only a glimpse of what...
.. is yet to come. What you see is a protocol that can kind of do what already exists, but not very well.
But it's much more flexible, and in the future can do a lot more. If you look at Bitcoin versus Vipps today,
it looks like Vipps is a lot easier, right? But Bitcoin is a lot more flexible, Bitcoin is programmable,
"Bitcoin" isn't owned by anyone. If you try to think about where that will take us in the future, imagine the entire...
.. world had Vipps; imagine if you could Vipps money to 7.5 billion people anywhere on the planet, just as easily...
.. as you can someone in Norway. Eventually, a technology like Bitcoin will be able to do that. Not yet.
There aren't enough people using it. It's not as easy to use. There isn't the capacity to do it for...
.. 7.5 billion people, just like there wasn't the capacity to do image attachments on email. But if you try to...
.. imagine where this is going as the flexibility increases, things become easier and easier. There's this very...
.. strange thing that happens with new and disruptive technologies - which is that at first, they completely fail...
.. to even simulate the technology they're replacing. Think about the introduction of the first car.
You have a horse, you have a carriage, and someone tries to sell you a car. They're there demonstrating this...
.. vehicle. Compared to the horse you have, the car sucks in every way. First of all, horses are the original...
.. self-driving vehicle: full autonomy. In cars we would call that "level four autonomy." [laughter]
You know, when the guy walks out of the saloon, [whistles], and a horse comes? We just managed...
.. to do that with a Tesla in the last three years, where it comes from the parking lot and picks you up.
Horses could do that for thousands of years, right? You arrive outside of the bar at the saloon, jump off...
.. the horse, and the horse just goes by itself to go refill on water and fuel.
It has independent, four-leg drive with traction control, autonomous obstacle avoidance, distance keeping...
.. and lane management. Meanwhile, if you try to use a car in the roads they had then, it would get stuck.
It wouldn't be able to move, because the roads were not viable. This happens again and again with technology,
not just in the past but also in the near present. 3D printing - most people hear about 3D printing, they read...
.. about it, and it got really popular in the last few years, with a small company called MakerBot.
How many people have heard of MakerBot and 3D printing? Yes. Have you seen it? 3D printing was not...
.. invented by MakerBot, of course. You could buy 3D printers at the time when MakerBot was released.
They were the size of four refrigerators stacked next to each other. They used either laser sintering or other...
.. forms of metal deposition. They cost about $300,00 to about $1 million dollars. They produce beautiful,
beautiful prototypes that can be used directly even in engines, out of metal components. They have a...
.. MakerBot in the corner that stinks of plastic, is rickety, very low resolution, and it produces this gnarly little...
.. plastic cube. And you say, "Behold the revolution of 3D printing!" It shipped. Anyone in the 3D printing...
.. business would say, "That's ridiculous. Why are you even pretending to try to compete?"
The answer is simple: because that thing cost $1. It looks crap now, but give it 30 years, put it on every...
.. desktop, and see it change the world, because you're never going to change it with this $1 million piece of...
.. equipment that you built - that's the size of a bus. We have drones. Everybody excited about drones?
Who has played with a drone? Fascinating, right? Imagine a platform that can be released from your...
.. hand, guided to an altitude, provide remote surveillance, perhaps monitor your location to tell you...
.. if someone is approaching (like a guard duty), return automatically, and land back on your hand whenever...
.. you wanted. Arabs had this technology 6,000 years ago, they called it birds of prey. They taught a hawk...
.. how to do that: take off from the hand, do wide-area surveillance, come back. Faster than a drone,
higher than a drone, feeds itself. [It] can actually go hunting for you too. Doesn't get lost, doesn't crash,
doesn't have twenty minutes of endurance -- [but] twenty hours of endurance on a single meal. A drone looks...
.. terrible compared to a bird of prey. Yet can you make a swarm of a thousand that can move at 500 miles/ hour?
You can never do that with a bird of prey. Give us ten years with drones and watch what happens!
This is what happens with technology again and again. In the first iteration, what it does isn't improve on...
.. the existing capabilities. Instead, it widens the field. It opens up the door for a much wider set of applications...
.. that were never possible before. In doing so, it fails to excel at applications you can already do - momentarily.
Until economies of scale, volume, coordination, and productivity make it much better at everything else...
.. and the thing that it originally failed at. We see this happen again and again with technology.
Now we're going to see it with the technology of money. Vipps is great - as long as you're over 15 [years old],
have a debit card or bank accounts denominated in Norway, and only want to send money to Norwegians.
Bitcoin looks like it can't do any of those things, but all you need to qualify is the ability to download...
.. an application on an Android phone that can cost $25, anywhere in the world. You can then send money to...
.. 7.5 billion people with that same application, as long as they download it too. At first, it looks inferior,
but it opens the door to create a completely unified financial system without borders. But it's not just...
.. a payments network. One of the other things that this technology does is provide a global store of value,
a universal reserve currency, a system of digital gold. We will look back (I think) ten years from now, if this...
.. experiment is successful, and see the emergence of this global standard, this new asset, that allows both...
.. individuals to preserve [their] wealth, and eventually even states to preserve wealth. It sounds preposterous,
if I say it today. But one day, countries will accumulate cryptocurrencies as part of their foreign reserves,
as part of their capital reserves. It seems ridiculous [but] it will happen. It will happen and they will be able to...
.. acquire these cryptocurrencies - that will not only represent value, but will also represent neutrality.
They will not belong to any flag, they will not reflect any geopolitics. Every form of reserve currency we have...
.. today reflects geopolitics, reflects national interests. But cryptocurrencies are reflective of math,
not geopolitical interests. You can have this emergence of a global asset class, a stable store of value,
that provides us with independence. And that's just the beginning. There are other blockchains, they're doing...
.. different things, things more in the area of governance. How many here have heard of / used Ethereum?
Now you keep hearing these words "smart contract." Most people have no idea what a smart contract is.
It sounds 'smart,' it sounds like a 'contract,' so maybe it will be related to legal language. But really, that term...
.. is quite misleading. A "smart contract" is really a dumb program. It's a very simple, dumb program.
What's special isn't the program [or] the smart contract. What's special is the platform it's running on,
a platform that allows you to execute code in a persistent, consistent, worldwide, secure, neutral,
censorship-resistant way. Unstoppable code that runs everywhere, that runs the same everywhere. A platform...
.. that can be trusted to combine financial activity and governance in a single program. That's a really exciting...
.. opportunity. Now, what are we using this opportunity for? To do initial coin offerings? That's a waste of that...
.. fantastic opportunity, and it's going to create some spectacular explosions when these ICOs go 'boom'!
But that doesn't change the fact that behind this is the possibility to reinvent governance. If you understand...
.. what Bitcoin is doing, Bitcoin is a direct disruption to the basis of central banking, store of value,
payment networks,  and international wire transfers. Those are obvious. Bitcoin offers solutions that disrupt...
.. these four functions: central banking, store of value, payment networks, international wires. It offers a novel...
.. way of doing these things in a way that's open, global, neutral, censorship-resistant. That's exciting.
What exactly is Ethereum doing? What does that disrupt? For that, you have to look at one of the most...
.. important inventions of the 19th century, which was the modern shareholder corporation. It's not really...
.. a 19th century invention, it's actually a 16th century invention. In the 19th century, we see the modern...
.. version of that, which is available across the world. It goes back to the East India Company.
The Dutch East India Company and British East India Company, the first two corporations, that under a royal...
.. charter allowed individuals to invest in a journey across the seas in order to get spices and bring them...
.. to Europe. That institution is the basis of commerce, and has been the basis of commerce for 400 years.
It's about to get majorly disrupted. What are the key characteristics of a corporation? 1. Jurisdiction.
Corporations have a domicile, they have a location. They have a specific country of registration. Who needs that?
Forget jurisdiction. How about we do that on completely global basis, with companies not registered anywhere,
but are registered everywhere? Or really not registered, they simply exist. The decentralized autonomous...
.. organisation is the reinvention of a 500-year old concept, of a corporation for the modern age.
It allows any number of humans or software agents to collaborate on the long-term or short-term basis,
to engage in a common venture with a governance structure that allows them to vote, a system that...
.. allows them to share in equity, contribute to funding, and receive returns on investments.
Most of the early examples we have so far are focused on the funding side, which in my opinion is the wrong...
.. side of the equation. Funding before governance is a very dangerous example. Most of the initial coin...
.. offerings we see coming out to Ethereum have a lot of funding and very little governance. The modern...
.. corporation is going to be reinvented as we introduce systems that offer us modern, new, novel mechanisms...
.. for governance. Eventually they'll reinvent financing as well, but governance is where it starts. I use a simple
... analogy to explain this concept: what is the difference between a rocket and a bomb? Rocket science is really...
.. the fundamental difference. It comes down to governance. If you look at a rocket, chemically speaking,
it's a bomb. The components of a rocket are exactly the same chemical components you would use to...
.. construct a bomb. The only difference is one is an exothermic, violet reaction, that happens almost...
.. instantaneously and in every direction. The other one is an exothermic, violent reaction that happens...
.. gradually over time, in one direction. Sometimes, if you get the governance wrong, the rocket turns into a bomb.
It goes from one direction - measured - to every direction instantaneously. How you learn how to do governance,
is by building several of these, having most of them blow up before they leave the launch pad, learning how to...
.. do better governance - until one day, you can get quite high with these devices. You can achieve rocket science.
But if you look at the early days of rocket science, it doesn't seem possible. These things [kept] exploding.
Ethereum's ICOs are rocket science without governance, and what we're creating is a lot of pretty powerful...
.. bombs that are exploding on the launch pad. More of them are going to blow up. Some of them are going to...
.. reach a few hundred feet in altitude and then blow up spectacularly. Part of the reason is: we're putting a lot...
.. of fuel (which is the money) behind very little governance. The more fuel you put, and the less...
.. governance you have, the more likely you are to make the transition from rocket to bomb. The worst thing...
.. you can do to a startup is take a group of professionals who have never worked together and...
.. then hand them $10-15 million dollars on the basis of an idea. Watch how quickly friendships fall apart,
how quickly the people you thought were your friends give you a call from Bermuda saying, "I'm really sorry..."
"man, but it was too tempting. I had to take the money and run." This is going to keep happening, but don't let...
.. that distract from the very fundamental thing that's happening underneath. We are gradually building...
.. reusable, mature governance models. Governance models that will reinvent the modern corporation.
This is no small task. Reinventing the modern corporation will radically transform international...
.. commerce. These two examples are just what happened in the first eight years of this technology...
.. called the blockchain. Out of this technology, we have these two examples: 1) a system of money, payments,
international currency, and possibly a reserve currency 2) a system of governance through smart contracts,
that will revolutionize the modern corporation. Don't let that distract you though, there's a lot more "blockchain"...
.. going on, and most of it is bullshit. The very difficult task is being able to tell the difference between these...
.. very real, meaningful, disruptive, innovative technologies that we see, and the meaningless,
marketing-driven, funding-oriented excuses that people call "blockchain" in order to raise money.
It's often very difficult to tell which is which. You have to start with: what are the principles a blockchain delivers?
I prefer to speak of open public blockchains, because "open public blockchain" is the magic technology.
It's like the difference between internet and TCP/IP. TCP/IP is not revolutionary, TCP/IP is not what made...
.. the internet magical. In fact, the early internet didn't use TCP/IP and it was still revolutionary.
Today's internet could change to a different protocol and still be revolutionary. What's magical about the internet...
.. is that it is open, borderless, neutral, and censorship-resistant. It is a global, equalizing communication...
.. system, and TCP/IP is just a means by which it gets that done. The open public blockchains today are...
.. the internet of money, the internet of corporations, that we see now emerging. "Blockchain" is just the TCP/IP.
You can take TCP/IP and make something very boring. How many of you work in corporate environments?
My condolences. How many of you have an intranet in your company? How many of you love the applications...
.. you have on your intranet? TCP/IP, right? You take this technology, and what you do is remove all the things...
.. that make the internet interesting. The internet is open, an intranet is closed. The internet is borderless,
an intranet has firewalls. The internet has permissionless applications anyone can write,
the intranet is controlled by the IT department and has applications from Oracle and Microsoft.
The internet connects you to the world, the intranet isolates you from the world.
So you've taken the same technology, changed the culture, and built something that doesn't resemble...
.. what you started with. You end up with something that is insecure, stale, boring, and that sucks productivity...
.. instead of increasing it. The very same companies that luxuriated intranets - banks, large corporations -
.. are now luxuriating in "blockchain," because they failed to learn the fundamental lesson. What is magical in...
.. these technologies is the open, permissionless, interconnected, borderless nature. Connecting the world,
freeing the flow of information. In the case of Bitcoin, freeing the flow of money globally. In the case of...
.. Ethereum, freeing the constraints of governance and corporations globally. You take that technology...
.. you close it, control it, control access, control innovation, and build a system that is inside your...
.. company. What you've built is the intranet of money, the intranet of corporations. It is boring. But it's worse...
.. than that. It's not just boring, it's also insecure. It is almost impossible to secure the system because...
.. you centralise control over it. The only reason Bitcoin is secure, the only reason Ethereum is secure, the only...
.. reason all of these open public blockchains are secure, is because control is completely decentralised.
Centralising control does not make things more secure, it makes them vulnerable. You've also taken away...
.. immutability. Immutability is one of the great characteristics of these open public blockchains.
Information stored in them cannot be retroactively changed - unless you have a closed private blockchain,
in which case it is no longer immutable. It can be changed by whoever has the keys, which today is the...
.. corporation or consortium. Tomorrow, it's a gang of 14-year old hackers called Anonymous. They take over...
changing your "immutable" blockchain, which turned out was very mutable. If you take away the characteristics...
.. that make these open public blockchains interesting, what you end up with is stale, insecure, and boring.
Be very skeptical when you hear a company say, "We're going to use a blockchain." 90% of the time, what they...
.. mean is, "We're going to use a database." The reason is, the first hurdle that any company or government...
.. must overcome before they can really use this technology, is to relinquish the illusion of control.
That's step one. You want to use "blockchain"? There are several open public blockchains. Use those! "But..."
"..we don't control them!" Exactly. Relinquish the illusion of control. Embrace the security of decentralisation.
Embrace the innovation of the commons. Embrace the openness of global communication. Those are the...
.. revolutionary things, those are the things that make these technologies interesting. Give up control.
That is very difficult to sell, it's a very difficult idea to even communicate within a large corporation.
"You will be more secure if you have no control over this system." That is a very difficult concept to convey, [but]...
.. it is the truth. You have to be brave when you have these conversations. You have to be able to "call...
.. a spade a spade," as we say. I know this is not part of the culture here.
American culture being very direct is, I'm sure - as in most of Europe - considered rude here. Right?
If your boss comes and says, "We're going to use a private blockchain," it is not proper to say...
"You know what, Bjorn? That's bullshit!" You can hire an American consultant to come in and do exactly that...
.. little thing. It's probably much more credible if they're well-paid. But be brave! Speak your mind! If you see...
.. that what your companies are trying to do is simply a database, repeating business as usual, but sticking...
.. the word "blockchain" to make it sound cool and modern, it's not really a blockchain. It's just a database.
Speak up and say, "That's not what this technology is designed to do." Ask the important questions.
Which of the promises, features, capabilities of the open public blockchain are we trying to leverage with...
.. this application? What is it that this application
What [about] this application says that we need a blockchain? Because not every application needs one.
In fact, very few applications need a global trust platform. It's inefficient, it doesn't scale.
Democracy doesn't scale. Blockchains that are open and public are inherently egalitarian systems.
That does not scale. It's not intended to scale. It's intended to be egalitarian. There's a difference.
What are the principles you're trying to achieve? "We want to use 'blockchain' to put healthcare information-"
Really? Which part of open, neutral, censorship-resistant, borderless, transparent, resilient are you going to use?
At least five of those are antithetical to any application where you would put private healthcare information.
I hear this a lot. How many of you heard of healthcare on the blockchain? Oh my god, it's a nightmare!
Can you imagine having your healthcare information on a public ledger that can never be changed, even if...
.. there's a mistake? We already have a system like that in the modern world: it's credit scoring. It's where...
.. a single corporation controls your credit rating and when they make a mistake, they don't have to fix it...
.. and you are punished for life for somebody else's erroneous data. Now we want to do this in healthcare?!
With our DNA? What a brilliant idea... Sign me out! I don't want anything to do with it.
"Blockchain in transportation," "blockchain for clearance securities," "blockchain for logistics," "blockchain for..."
Blah blah, blah blah, blah... [For] 90% of those applications, the word "blockchain" means "database."
Learn the difference, teach the difference, and be brave enough to speak up when you see the difference.
This technology is revolutionary because it is open, public, global. If you used it for the right applications,
the applications that need to be open, transparent, highly innovative, censorship-resistant, neutral, and global,
then this technology is really, really powerful. Use it for the right things. Thank you!